- An Air India Boeing 787 took off
for what should have
been a routine nine-hour flight,
but then ended up
crashing into buildings
just half a minute after departure.
(plane booms)
Why?
What actually happened?
Well, I will get to the details
from the interim report soon,
but first I want to talk
about the period leading up
to its release
on the 11th of July, 2025.
Unfortunately, in the immediate
aftermath of this tragedy,
there were no real updates
from the investigators,
which frankly isn't that surprising
given how much they had to do
and how careful they needed to be
in weighing the information.
But this also meant
that there was
a substantial information vacuum,
which gave rise to wild speculation
or even worse, real trash
in the form of deliberate misinformation
that a very large section of the public
just wasn't equipped to
distinguish from the truth.
For example, several fake
interim reports were circulated
and one of them claimed
that the captain's seat
had slipped or fallen backwards,
causing him to inadvertently
pull back on the thrust
levers without even realizing it.
Now that actually did happen
to an Air India Express flight,
a Boeing 737-800, which
I covered in a different video.
But that also meant
that these hoaxsters
were now using a mix of AI tools
and real stories to create narratives
that initially
looked really believable,
thanks to details
from that older story
and its final report.
Now I know that not everyone
can quickly identify these scams.
They are designed
to deceive and they really do.
And in events like this,
it's always important
to turn to reliable sources
and to think critically,
especially when you see
something really shocking
being sent to you
from a friend or colleague.
Since at least some
of this fabricated material
is based on real events and reports,
it looks super convincing,
even to industry insiders
and that just makes my blood boil.
Not only do we have
a horrible tragedy on our hands,
the first fatal crash of a Boeing 787
and the deadliest crash in a decade,
no, we also have people
knowingly spreading AI-generated nonsense
just to get some temporary attention
or for some other nefarious motives.
That is actually a big
part of why my team and I
have been following this story closely
and making frequent video
updates for you guys,
and I hope you appreciate that.
But now, finally, we
have a preliminary report,
and while it still doesn't include
any definitive conclusions,
it sheds a lot of light
on what happened.
So this video is
all about the facts here,
what we do know and what it means,
and also what we don't know,
which is just as important.
And it's also about
what you can do from now on
to remain well informed.
This tragedy happened
on Thursday the 12th of June, 2025,
involving Air India Flight 171
from Ahmedabad to London's
Gatwick Airport in the UK.
Until this tragic event,
Flight 171 was a daily service
for Air India, departing
early in the afternoon.
And on this day,
the aircraft had been scheduled
to depart at 1310 local time.
The flight's captain
was a 56-year-old male
who had a total flight
experience of 15,638 hours,
and nearly 8,600 hours
was on the Boeing 787,
of which 8,260
was as pilot-in-command.
Now, earlier local news reports said
that he was also
a line-training captain
with Air India and that he
planned to retire soon,
but that was not
mentioned in the report.
His first officer was 32 years old
and had a total flight
experience of 3,403 hours,
of which 1,128 hours were
flown on the Boeing 787.
And it's important to
note here that for this flight,
the first officer was pilot flying
and the captain was pilot monitoring.
As part of their pre-flight preparation,
the two pilots underwent
some medical checks,
including a breath analyzer test,
which showed that they were both fit
to operate the flight over to Gatwick.
Both pilots also seemed
to have gotten adequate rest
before the flight,
according to the report.
One of the speculations we heard
before the preliminary
report was released
was that the aircraft might
have been carrying something
that could have affected
the instruments on board,
but the load manifest showed
that there were no dangerous
goods on board this flight.
Anyway, the pilots' fuel calculations,
the rest of the loadsheet
as well as the V-speed calculations
didn't raise any flags
for the investigations either.
Everything was apparently
within allowable limits.
Once the crew were ready,
they taxied out for departure
about half an hour behind schedule
towards Runway 23.
Now, Ahmedabad only has one runway,
and its parallel taxiway doesn't run
all the way to the
threshold for Runway 23.
And this meant that the
crew had to taxi out
and enter the runway
from taxiway Romeo four,
which is connecting close
to about halfway down the runway.
Now, initial ADS-B data
of the plane's taxi route
was missing quite a lot of data points,
which also created
some initial controversy,
where some suspected that the crew
might have tried to take off from
that intersection taxiway, Romeo Four
but later reporting,
and, of course,
this preliminary report confirmed
that the 787 did not take off
from that midfield position.
Instead, the flight crew backtracked
to the threshold of the 3,505-meter,
or 11,500 feet long runway,
and then made a full length takeoff.
Now Ahmedabad Airport is only 58 meters
or 189 feet above sea level,
but at the time of their departure,
the high temperature
of around 37 degrees Celsius,
or 98.6 Fahrenheit,
meant that the density altitude
was around 3,200 feet.
This requires a bit extra
performance from the aircraft,
but nothing that the Boeing 787
and its mighty GEnx engines
couldn't handle on this day.
And, of course, these are conditions
that crews flying in and out of India
would have been entirely familiar with.
The crew started their takeoff roll
at time 0807 and 37 seconds UTC,
and then reached
their V1 decision speed
just under a minute later,
which would be
considered completely normal
for their takeoff weight.
The plane's weight on
wheel switches then indicated
that they lifted off at time
0808 and 39 seconds.
And initially, all videos
taken from this event showed
that they achieved
a normal positive rate of climb.
But very soon, these
same videos then showed
that this climb flattened out
and then quickly turned into a descent,
one that the aircraft
then never recovered from.
- The Air India incident
that Petter's covering here
is one of the most
shocking aviation events
in recent memory.
And since then,
the preliminary report
has been released,
bringing some surprising
and important updates.
With over 300
articles covering the story,
we needed a clearer,
unbiased view of the events,
so we turned to Ground News.
It helped us cut through the noise
and you can follow along too
at ground.news/mentour.
Right away, it's clear that about 30%
of the coverage
comes from media conglomerates
and only about 10% comes
from independent sources.
And what stands out
to me in the coverage
of the Air India incident
is how differently outlets
choose to frame the story.
Some focus on individual responsibility
or emotional angles
while others emphasize procedures,
diplomacy or tech details.
It shows how left
and right-leaning sources
often highlight different aspects based
on their audience
and editorial approach.
Importantly, Ground News
indicates the factual accuracy
of each source, allowing us
to filter by those we trust,
which is ideal for
stories of this complexity.
There's even a custom
Mentour feed with all the aviation,
Boeing and tech news that I cover.
And if you're tired
of sensational headlines,
check it out at ground.news/mentour
or scan the QR code to get 40% off.
It's just $5 a
month for a limited time.
Thanks to Ground
News for sponsoring this.
Now, let's get back to the video.
- Now, I'll come back to
the findings in this report soon,
but first let's look
at some of the speculation
that we all heard
immediately after the event.
For example, initially there was
a big focus on the flaps.
- The flaps were not down.
- One theory being that the crew
might not have set them
correctly for the takeoff.
We now know for a
fact that this didn't happen.
The flaps were correctly set.
And, in fact, that mistake
would have been
a really difficult one to make
in today's aircraft since several
of our pre-departure
checklists include these flaps
and those checklists
are electronic on the 787.
And on top of that,
the aircraft also knows
where the flaps should
be and therefore,
will warn the pilots
if they're not set correctly.
Now the point I want to make here
is that with the low resolution
videos that we first saw,
seeing if the flaps were actually set
was really, really difficult.
Even with good
resolution pictures or videos,
the slats might be
a little bit more visible,
but you have to look
very closely to be able
to tell how the
trailing edge flaps are set.
You see, one of the things
the 787 is famous for
is its carbon fiber
composite fuselage and wings.
And the fact that carbon
fiber is much less prone
to fatigue cracking also means
that they can be very flexible and thin,
making them more efficient.
The Boeing 787-8 has two flap settings
commonly used for takeoff,
flaps five and flaps 15.
And with flaps five, which
we now know that these pilots
were using for this takeoff,
the leading edge flap surfaces,
the slats, extend
and the trailing edge flaps
also extend rearwards,
but they droop down only slightly,
which is why they are so hard to see.
The next point
that got people's attention
were the engines,
and there was an
early reason for that,
especially after the circulation
of a better quality version
of a video where a buzzing
noise could clearly be heard,
which led a lot of people to believe
that the Ram Air Turbine,
or RAT, had been deployed.
Again, it's almost impossible
to see the RAT in the videos,
it's the size of a propeller
of a small general aviation aircraft,
but it would be spinning
fast in the slipstream,
causing that very characteristic noise.
Its mast and door would
be somewhat easier to see,
but not from the rear and at
the resolution of these videos.
However, like I said,
it is possible to distinguish
the noise from the RAT,
and other CCTV footage
that we didn't get access to initially,
but that was included
in the preliminary report,
showed that the Ram Air Turbine
or RAT did indeed deploy,
while the aircraft was
still in its initial climb.
The investigation also clarified
that there was no
significant bird activity
close to the aircraft,
which might have affected
the aircraft's engines,
but obviously the RAT's deployment
meant that there was a lot
of focus on the engines
and what might cause
them to lose power.
Now, there are many reasons
why the RAT can deploy,
and many of them does
not involve a dual engine failure,
as Ben and I have discussed
in our previous podcast
over on the Captains Speaking
podcast channel,
but one point worth highlighting here
is that a dual-engine failure
is not only extremely rare,
it is also practically impossible
for both engines to fail
at the exact same time
due to most technical faults.
That's important to understand,
because like I said earlier,
we could see in one of the videos
that the plane rotated,
and initially started to gain
altitude for several seconds,
which means that it definitely
did have power to begin with.
But unless it lost power
from both engines
at more or less exactly the same time,
we should be able to
see a distinctive yawing movement
when it happened.
The engines are quite
far apart out on the wings,
and losing one means
that it will suddenly
generate a lot of drag,
while the other engine
would obviously
still be producing thrust,
and that asymmetric
thrust should be visible.
Now, even with something
like fuel contamination,
which could affect both engines,
dual failures at the same time
are practically impossible.
And yet, we saw no such
yaw on any of those videos,
or any obvious signs
of a technical engine trouble,
like smoke coming out
of one of them or surges.
But there is also
a small caveat to this.
The Boeing 787 is
a very modern airliner,
complete with a fly-by-wire system,
and that system is actually designed
to automatically
compensate for asymmetric thrusts
using the rudder and the rest
of its controls if necessary.
The aircraft will even move
the rudder pedals
when it does this to let
the pilots know what it is doing.
So, in theory at least,
that could explain why we
can't really see any momentary yaw
in the videos if the aircraft lost power
from its engines at different times.
Another point worth mentioning
here is the landing gear.
Like most widebody aircraft,
the 787 has main gear legs
that are equipped with trucks or boogies,
which means that
each leg has four wheels,
two front and two rear.
The preliminary report shows
that the landing gear lever was found
in the down and locked position,
and there is no
mentioning of the lever
being moved during the
entire accident sequence.
Now, that is interesting,
because when the landing
gear is down and locked,
the rear pair of the wheels
on each boogie sits
lower than the front pair.
But before the gear can be retracted,
the mechanism rotates the boogie
so that the front pair of the wheels
drops lower than the rear,
and that's to allow the wheels
to fit better into the wheel well base
at the bottom of the fuselage.
Now, normally, when the
boogies do this rotation,
the main gear doors open
at pretty much the same time.
And in at least one of the videos,
the boogies seem to be rotated
and the front wheel sits lower
than the rear wheels on each leg,
but the main
gear doors remain closed.
Now, we don't know
why this happened,
if the gear retraction
sequence actually was initiated
and not mentioned in the interim report,
or if that gear position
is a visual illusion of some sort.
The 787 does include
a lot of automation
for its electrical
and hydraulic systems,
all of which could have affected
what we saw without
any action from the pilot.
So we likely won't
know the answer to that
until the final report comes out.
But let's now see what we
actually do know
from this interim report.
We first learned that the investigation
was focusing on the
fuel cutout switches,
thanks to an article by Jon Ostrower
in The Air Current
from the 8th of July.
Now, by the way, The Air Current
is one of the most
important aviation insider sources
that my team and I use for
our Mentour Now! channel.
And they are extremely sensitive
about misinformation and speculation,
so we knew that they wouldn't
publish something like this
without having good sources.
Now, the fuel cutout
switches are located
on the central pedestal behind
the two thrust levers,
and we pilots normally
manipulate them on the ground,
either to start the
engines before a flight
or to shut them down
after we stop at the gate.
They are located where they are
within easy reach of each of the pilots
because they also form part
of several important
emergency checklists
like engine fire, severe damage
or separation for example,
where we quickly might need
to cut the fuel to the
burning or damaged engine.
Now, after that initial
reporting from The Air Current,
sure enough, the
preliminary report did show
that at time 0808 and 42 seconds,
just three seconds
after Air India Flight 171
had become airborne,
the fuel cutout switches
of first engine number one,
then a second later,
engine number two
suddenly transitioned
from run to cutoff.
As Ben and I have explained
in another live podcast,
there are a couple of features designed
in these switches to
make sure that nobody
can bump or move them accidentally.
First, there are two big ears poking out
of the pedestal on
either side of the switches
to shield them from
any accidental bumping.
And secondly, the
switches themselves
can't simply be flipped back and forth.
No, to move them, you
first need to pull upwards,
then pivot the switch
over into a new position
and then release it into its new notch.
This is a well-proven design.
Other switches in Boeing cockpits work
in very much the same way,
like the landing gear lever for example,
which also needs to be pulled out
and then rotated and released.
Now, I should mention
that the preliminary report
also highlights an FAA
Special Airworthiness
Information Bulletin,
or SAIB, that was
released back in 2018.
That bulletin involved
the locking feature
of the fuel
control switches like these,
but ones that were
installed on Boeing 737s.
And the bulletin said
that some of these switches
were apparently installed
with the locking feature disengaged
or not up to standard.
But that was, however, not considered
an unsafe condition by the FAA,
and even though an inspection
of these switches was recommended,
it was never made mandatory.
The interim report states
that Air India had
not made this voluntary inspection
of this particular aircraft,
but it's important to point out here
that there are no reports
in the history of this aircraft
showing any critical problems
with these specific switches.
On top of that,
the report also points out
that the fuel control module
that includes these
switches was replaced
on this aircraft twice
after this SAIB was issued,
once in 2019 and again in 2023,
for reasons that had nothing to do
with the fuel control switches.
Now, I really want
to stress that at this point,
we do not know how
or why these switches were moved,
but we know that one
of the pilots did ask the other,
why did he cut off?
And the other pilot replied
that he did not do so.
Those statements will be
the subject of a lot of scrutiny
by the investigation going forward,
but at the moment it can be interpreted
in two different ways.
One that the pilots did,
in fact, not move the switches,
but the other that one of them did
but just didn't own up to it.
In any case, the aircraft
did as it was told.
Fuel to the engines
was immediately cut off,
and the engines
quickly started rolling back.
And that obviously was what triggered
the release of the
Ram Air turbine in the back,
which I mentioned earlier.
Then, at a time 0808
and 52 seconds,
10 seconds after
the fuel control switches
were moved to cut off,
someone then moved the
engine one switch back to run,
and four seconds later also
the switch for engine number two.
At the same time,
the aircraft automatically
initiated the start
of its auxiliary power unit,
the APU, to give the
aircraft some extra electrical power.
But unlike the Ram Air turbine,
which started supplying the aircraft
with hydraulics just five seconds
after it was deployed,
the APU likely never
had time to come online.
However, some other systems in the 787
were working to save the aircraft
and its passengers and crew.
When the fuel cut-off
switches are moved back to run
and the plane is in flight,
the engine electronics
automatically attempt
to relight the engines
as soon as possible.
So that was what now happened.
The flight data recorder showed
that the exhaust gas temperatures, or EGT,
for both engines now started rising.
Engine number one,
whose switch was restored first,
stopped its deceleration
and started to recover.
Engine number two was a bit slower,
but in any case, by this point,
it was already too late.
13 seconds after the first
engine switch was moved to run,
one of the pilots made a Mayday call,
whose exact wording
was not quoted in the report.
And just another six seconds later,
the aircraft hit the northeast
wall of a nearby building
with an estimated nose-up
angle of about eight degrees.
When it did so, it quickly disintegrated,
with pieces of its fuselage,
wings and engines
subsequently hitting
four more buildings around,
and its enormous fuel load caught fire.
All but one of the plane's 242 occupants,
plus 19 people on the ground,
lost their lives in the crash,
and many more on the ground
were seriously injured.
So where do we go from here then?
Well, again, this is
a preliminary investigation report,
which is intended only
as a factual account of what happened.
We will know the full story
when the final report is released,
likely in a year or two from now.
Until then, I would really
recommend everyone
to try to stay clear of
speculation around the Boeing 787,
Air India and everything else here,
until the investigation comes
with actionable safety actions to take,
because only then can we be sure
that all of the different angles
have been taken into account.
Now like I said in the beginning,
the early information vacuum
on this accident meant
that people started looking
in the most unlikely places
for any type of information.
Cabin entertainment system
that doesn't work on the ground,
or air conditioning systems
that aren't running
immediately after boarding
can be really frustrating for sure,
but these systems are often separate
from what we pilots
consider in the cockpit
and what we need for a safe flight,
and they seldom offer any clues
about what caused
an accident like this.
Now when it comes to misinformation,
there are a few clues to
look for in order to see them.
The very first hoax reports
came within days of the crash,
adding that a final report
would be ready within a
coming couple of days,
and that would obviously
be utterly impossible.
So if you see reports like this,
have a look at the dates
and see if they make sense.
Again, this is the worst
aviation accident
in the last decade, and attention on it
could remain very high for weeks
and months, and rightly so.
Understandably, Boeing took
this matter very seriously,
effectively pulling out of
the Paris Air Show in June
to help assist the investigation
in any way that they could.
But here I should also
point out that at least
as we are recording this,
we haven't heard Boeing
releasing any safety bulletins
or the FAA publishing
any airworthiness directives
on the Boeing 787, and there were also
no such indications
in the interim report.
This suggests that
even though the investigation
is slowly focusing
on specific systems,
this accident is likely not related
to a design problem with the aircraft.
But that's where
we need to draw the line
between speculation and information.
India's Aircraft Accident
Investigation Bureau have support
from the NTSB, the FAA
and from Britain's
Air Accident Investigation Branch,
and by the way, this preliminary report
was far more detailed
than many had expected,
which I am super, super happy to see.
It is refreshing to
see that kind of openness
and transparency, which is
exactly what we need
in order to learn
from tragedies like this.
Now I hope that
you found this video interesting.
Let us know in the comments
if you have any
more questions about it,
and Ben and I will try
to answer them in a future
Captain Speaking podcast.
I also take a lot of live questions
in my Zoom hangouts
with my fantastic Patreon crew,
who makes these kind
of reporting videos possible.
And if you want
to join my next hangout,
then scan this QR code
or go to patreon.com/join/mentourpilot
I would love to see you there.
My name is Peter Hörnfeldt
and you're watching Mentour Now.
Have an absolutely fantastic day
and I'll see you next time.
Bye bye.